# webcomponents.org v2 Design

The webcomponents.org v2 relaunch is a from-scratch rebuild of the current webcomponents.org with up-to-date content, a more familiar and easier-to-maintain stack, and a simpler library-agnostic catalog system.

## Stack

The Stack is updated to be more familiar to modern JavaScript developers, including using a popular static site generator like 11ty, Node.js servers, and GraphQL.

* Server
  * Google Cloud Run
  * Node 18+
  * Google Firestore database
  * GraphQL via graphql-helix and graphql-tools
* Client
  * Web components with Lit
  * Apollo GraphQL Client
  * Playground Elements
* Static site generation
  * eleventy
* Schema
  * GraphQL SDL
  * graphql-codegen to generate TypeScript interfaces

## Catalog Server

The catalog server is a standalone backend service with a GraphQL API that is accessed by the site's frontend server.

## Access Control

The server is intended to eventually have a public-facing GraphQL service. It also has admin functionality such as HTTP endpoints for updating the packages in the catalog that need to be reachable by scheduling services (such as [Google Cloud Scheduler](https://cloud.google.com/scheduler) or [Google Cloud Tasks](https://cloud.google.com/tasks)). These admin endpoints are attractive for denial-of-service attacks because they initiate expensive bulk I/O and database operations.

The admin endpoints must have restricted access control and not be public. For now, the easiest way to do this without a third service (a separate admin service) is to restrict access to the whole catalog server service which also implements the admin endpoints. Later, the catalog server can be refactored to contain only a public API and the admin endpoints moved to a separate service.

Access control to the catalog service can be implemented in Google Cloud Run by setting up a service account to make requests and limiting the service to non-public visibility, [as documented here](https://cloud.google.com/run/docs/authenticating/service-to-service).

As the article says, this should be environment agnostic, so it works outside of Google Cloud - though each environment will have it's own way of setting the access control of the catalog service.

### Custom Elements Manifest

[Custom Elements Manifest](https://github.com/webcomponents/custom-elements-manifest) is a format for describing npm packages of custom elements, intended for applications like a catalog. Manifests are generated by various tools, like the [Custom Elements Manifest Analyzer](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@custom-elements-manifest/analyzer).

The catalog will read custom elements manifests from npm. We detect manifests by reading the `"customElements"` field from `package.json` so that we don't have to download a package to see if it contains a manifest.

### Indexing Packages

#### Open-source, npm packages first

The catalog will initially be oriented around open-source packages published to npm. This is where the vast majority of elements are now published.

Cataloging publically available closed-source elements (those sold to the public for a fee) is not a goal, as that would require indexing proprietary information about where to retrieve elements, their license and cost, etc.

Package sources other than npm, like GitHub packages or package-less distributions available via HTTP, or closed-source internal elements, may be included in the future. npm sources will be namespaced to prevserve the ability to add new sources.

#### Permissionless importing

We want to make importing packages as transparent as possible, so that they require no special permission or ownership of packages to import. Any anonymous users should be able to request that an npm package is imported. So we need to make importing fast, idempotent (when there is nothing to update), and rate-limited to protect against abuse and DOS.

The catalog will record in the database when a package was imported, what the versions were at import time, and whether the package was a valid, custom-elements containing packge. This will let us know quickly and cheaply whether to read any information from npm to attempt another import.

Packages contain a number of versions and versions are immutable, so if we see that a new version has not been published, we don't need to do a new import.

Once a package has been successfully imported at least once, it will be periodically scanned for new versions to be imported (or we will listen for new versions from the npm registry if possible).

#### Collections

Design systems and other groups of components benefit from first-class support in the catalog. Users may want to search for collections of components rather than individual components.

Collections don't necessarily correspond to packages. Many design systems publish each component as a separate npm package.

We would like a way for element authors to define their own collections control exactly what elements are included. For this it would be ideal to have a centralized definition of a collection. Even though a collection is not published to npm, a collection definition could be published to a well-known URL, such as a file stored in GitHub. A custom element manifest can then include references to collection definitions so that while indexing element we can discover and index collections.

### Schema

The catalog server has two schemas in play: A GraphQL schema and an implicit Firestore schema (implicit, since Firestore is schemaless). We will try to keep these as close as possible. Some places where schemas differ:
* IDs: Firestore documents have immutable IDs that must be unique within their subcollection. This makes immutable package data like package name, or the version string for a specific version, well-suited to be document IDs. They will name to GraphQL fields like name or version.
* Collections: Firestore has both array-valued fields and subcollections. In GraphQL these are both described by an array-valued field, so Firestore subcollections will be mapped to GraphQL array fields.
* Dates vs Timestamps: Firestore has a Timestamp data type that will be converted to JS dates for GraphQL
* Maps: Firestore supports map-valued fields. GraphQL only supports list values, so we must convert maps to lists of key/value pairs.
* Denormalized fields in Firestore documents may or may not be present in the GraphQL schema.

Firestore stores data in documents and collections. Collections and documents have immutable IDs, and can be referenced by a path of alternating collection IDs and document IDs. This forms a hierarchy somewhat like a filesystem.

GraphQL schemas describe a graph of types, though query results are always a tree. GraphQL fields with a list type can represent Firestore collections. Since Firestore is schemaless we'll use the GraphQL schema types to describe Firestore documents.

#### Package, PackageVersion, and CustomElement

One root Firestore collection is `packages`, containing `Package` documents. A `Package` represents a single package name and all published versions of the package, under the subcollection `versions`. `PackageVersion` describes a single publisend version of a package. `PackageVersion` then contains a `customElements` collection of `CustomElement` documents.

We end up with a hierarchy like:

`Package` -> `versions` -> `PackageVersion` -> `customElements` -> `CustomElement`

Only one of the `PackageVersion` documents represents the latest version of a package. Queries will generally be performed against the lastest versions. Other versions will be available for documentation.

#### Collections

Since collections don't neccesaarily correspond to packages, we will have a separate root Firestore collection to represent element collections.

A simple representation of a collection would be a list of elements that belong to it. For this we need a way to reference an element. Package and custom element name works if element names are unique per package, which they should be. See [Identifying Elements](#identifying-elements).

So one optiion for a collection schema is:

`Collection`:
 * name
 * description
 * homepage
 * elements
   * package
   * element

### Queries

#### Querying elements

Firestore does not allow queries across collections, but it does suppport "collection group" queries. So we can do a query on the `customElements` collection group, regardless of what document is the direct parent of the subcollcetion, like:

```ts
db.collectionGroup('customElements').get()
```

The problem with this query is that it will return elements from every version of a package, not just the latest. The latest version of a package is denoted with the dist-tag `"latest"` and that's part of the `Package` metadata. In order to query elements from the latest published version, we need to denormalize the dist tag to `PackageVersion` and `CustomElement`. Then we can perform a query like:

```ts
db.collectionGroup('customElements')
  .where('distTag', 'array-contains', 'latest')
  .get();
```

Denormalizataion requrires that every time `distTags` is updated for a package that we also update every `PackageVersion` and `CustomElement` affected by that change. For instance, we may have to remove the `"latest"` dist tag from the previous version and add it to the new latest version.

This denormalization requirement extends to any field in `Package` or `PackageVersion` that we would like to use in a query on `CustomElement`. This in effect turns the `customElements` collection into a search index.

Possible denormalized query fields on `CustomElement`:
 * dist tags
 * package name
 * author
 * keywords
 * publish date
 * libraries used
 * npm downloads
 * collections

We can also denormalize fields that we want to read (but not query) along with `CustomElement`, though this is less neccessary as once we have query results we can read a `CustomElement`'s containing `PackageVersion` document easily with one extra read. This is better than reading a `PackageVersion` for potential matches only to throw them out when they fail a criteria.

#### Get all elements

Useful for catalog browsing and showing a set of components from a default query
on a page or inside an embedded catalog widget. This query may be ordered by some default ranking (popularity, quality, freshness, etc) 

#### Get elements by query

A filtered version of the above query, queryable on any of the fields in `CustomElement`

#### Get collections

_TBD_

#### Get authors

_TBD_

### Identifying Elements

In several places, like URLs and cross-references from collections, we will need a way to refer to an element.

Packages are not actually organized by element, they are organized by modules. Yet it's common and easy for users to refer to an element from a package, regarless of which module the element is exported from.

To be convenient, we can form element identifiers from a package-name/element-name combination. If for some reason an element name is used more than once in a package (other than re-exporting it) we can add a disambiguation token, or allow the element to be referred from by module.

For instance, we might have a URL to a catalog page for `@shoelace-style/shoelace/sl-button` like:

`webcomponents.org/catalog/element/@shoelace-style/shoelace/sl-button/`

If there are two `sl-button`s in the `@shoelace-style/shoelace` package, we can refer to the second (determined by some heuristic) like:

`webcomponents.org/catalog/element/@shoelace-style/shoelace/sl-button/2`.

This case should be rare since there will usually only be one "custom element export" (the `customElements.define()` or `@customElement()` call) for an element in a package.

We can also refer to elements via their full package/module path:

`webcomponents.org/catalog/package/@shoelace-style/shoelace/dist/components/button/button.js#sl-button`.

Package versions will be encoded into the package name:

`webcomponents.org/catalog/package/@shoelace-style/shoelace@2.0.0-beta.78/...`.

### Requirements for Inclusion in the catalog

We would like to ensure that elements in the catalog are actual custom elements, and easy to include in projects that use a variety of build systems. We can do analysis of projects as we index them to see if they meet certain requirements to facilitate this.

* `"customElements"` `package.json` field pointing to a valid custom element manifest
* `"type": "module"` in `package.json` or appropriate package exports
* Element module paths in custom element manifest exist and include the declared export.

Additional, optional requirements based on static analysis:
* No non-browser-supported imports in custom element definition modules (so that elements don't require specific bundlers to use, etc).
* No unguarded use of non-Browser APIs like `process.env`, etc.
* All non-dev dependencies meet the same requirements.

Quality signals:
* Does not bundle common libraries (like `lit`)

## Abuse and moderation

The catalog has little to no direct user-generated content - there are no plans at the moment for features like comments. But the catalog does display user-generated content from the npm packages and custom element definitions themselves. This is an avenue for abuse. We should not rely on npm to remove abusive content. We need a way to remove packages from the index and accept abuse reports. Assuming that abuse via npm is very infrequent, we can likely handle reports via email.

## Privacy and PII

We would like to store as little personal information as possible and mostly have a read-only site. If we ever add personalization features, like starring elements, creating lists, user-submitted element rankings, etc., we'll need to allow accounts and log-in, likely via a third-party login provider.
